Day 1 Notes & Answers

Today, you will learn
• Why C++ is a standard in software development
• The steps to develop a C++ program
• How to enter, compile, and link your first working C++ program

Note 1

The word program is used in two ways: to describe individual instructions
(or source code) created by the programmer, and to describe an entire piece of executable software. 
This distinction can cause enormous confusion, so this book tries to distinguish between the source code, on one hand, and the executable, on the other.



Note 2:
Procedural, Structured, and Object-Oriented Programming

Procedural:

A set of specific instructions executed one after the other.


Structured:

The principal idea behind it is the idea of divide and conquer.
Basically it can be thought as a computer program consiting of a set of smaller tasks working together to accomplish a bigger task.

If you have a complex task then you can break it down into managable chunks.


Object-Oriented:

The essence of 'Object-Oriented' programming is to model 'objects'.
Basically it allows you to add properties and/or attributes, such as age, fast, spacious, black, or wet. 


.NET:

.NET is an extension to C++ provided by Microsoft. 
If you wish to use its advanced features you will have to extend your knowledge of standard C++ to include these extensions to the language.



The ANSI Standard:
Stands for American National Standards Institute and was made as an international standard for C++. 

The C++ Standard is also referred to as the ISO (International Organization for Standardization) standard.

It was made as an attempt to ensure that C++ is portable, making sure that the code you write for a Microsoft Compiler also works with any other compiler out there following the same standards.  



C++ benefits/demands more than other languages that the program is pre-designed. 

-- 
DO
DO use a simple text editor to create
your source code, or use the built-in editor that comes with your compiler.
DO save your files with the .c, .cp, or .cpp extension. 
The .cpp extension is recommended.
DO check your documentation for
specifics about your compiler and linker
to ensure that you know how to compile
and link your programs.


DON'T
DON’T use a word processor that saves
special formatting characters. If you do
use a word processor, save the file as ASCII text.
DON’T use a .c extension if your compiler treats such files as C code instead of C++ code.
--

The process of creating a program:

1. Create a source code file with a .cpp extension.
2. Compile the source code into an object file with the .obj or .o extension.
3. Link your object file with any needed libraries to produce an executable program.


The Development Cycle:
Edit source code, compile, link, test (run), repeat if necessary.


While writing/compiling your code:

If you receive an error that there is no prototype for main, add the line int main();
My software does not require this!



Workshop:

1. What is the difference between an interpreter and a compiler?
A: An interpreter does  

2. How do you compile the source code with your compiler?
A: 

3. What does the linker do?
A: 

4. What are the steps in the normal development cycle?
A: Edit source code, compile, link, test, repeat until finished.